Question	1	-	$100
At	any	one	time,	what	percentage	of	5	to	16	year	olds	in	the	UK	have	a	mental	health	problem?
A:	1%
B:	5%
C:	10%
D:	20%
ANS
Answer:	C	- 10%
ANS
And	if	you	look	at	the	adult	population	this	figure	rises	to	1	in	4	or	25%.	It	has	been	estimated	that	by	
2020	depression	will	be	second	only	to	chronic	heart	disease	as	an	international	health	burden.
In	2007	UNICEF	compared	children	and	young	people	across	18	European	countries	and	North	
America	and	children	and	young	people	in	UK	came	bottom	of	the	table	for	wellbeing.	

NEWQ
Question	2	-	$500
How	many	teenagers	are	believed	to	self-harm	in	the	UK?
A:	1	in	15
B:	1	in	30
C:	1	in	50
D:	1	in	100
ANS
Answer:	A	- 1	in	15
ANS
Reports	show	that	1	in	15	teenagers	self	harm	but	the	true	figure	could	be	even	higher.	Around	
19,000	young	people	are	admitted	to	hospital	for	deliberate	self	harm	each	year.	
Self	harm	is	a	sign	of	emotional	distress.	Cutting	is	one	form	of	self	harm.	Others	include	burning,	
hitting,	bruising	or	poisoning.	
Self	harm	is	more	common	than	most	people	realise	and	it	affects	boys	as	well	as	girls.	Young	people	
who	self	harm	experience	a	lot	of	stigma.	They	may	be	bullied	as	a	result	which	will	make	them	feel	
even	worse.	They	are	also	more	likely	to	tell	a	friend	than	anyone	else	so	it	is	important	to	support	
your	friends	and	be	there	for	them.	If	a	friend	tells	you	they	self	harm,	don’t	be	afraid;	the	best	thing	
you	can	do	is	listen.	If	you	feel	worried	or	feel	out	of	your	depth	ask	someone	you	trust	or	a	
professional	for	advice.	

NEWQ
Question	3	-	$1,000
Which	of	these	symptoms	can	happen	if	you’re	depressed?
A: Don’t	feel	hungry
B: Hungry	all	the	time
C: Always	tired
D: Any	of	above
ANS
Answer:	D	-	any	of	the	above
ANS

NEWQ
Question	4 -	$16,000
Which	of	these	are	possible	triggers	for	a	psychotic	episode?
A: Taking	drugs
B: Going	to	school
C: Going	shopping
D: All	of	above
ANS
Answer:	A	- taking	drugs
ANS
Recent	research	claimed	that	people	using	cannabis	are	40%	more	likely	than	non-users	to	suffer	a	
psychotic	illness	such	as	schizophrenia.	The	study	found	the	most	frequent	users	of	cannabis	have	
twice	the	risk	of	non-users	of	developing	psychotic	symptoms,	such	as	hallucinations	and	delusions.	
They	said	that	people	with	family	history	of	mental	illness	or	who	already	had	mental	health	issues	
should	avoid	using	cannabis.

NEWQ
Question	5 -	$32,000
How	many	murders	are	committed	in	England	&	Wales	in	one	year	by	people	judged	to	be	mentally	
ill?
A: 1555
B: 555
C: 55
D: 5
ANS
Answer:	C	-	55
ANS
Violence	can	be	a	feature	of	mental	illness	and	every	year	in	England	and	Wales	on	average	55	people	
are	killed	by	persons	judged	to	be	mentally	ill.	
But	you	are	70	times	more	likely	to	be	killed	on	the	roads.	Indeed	the	risk	of	being	killed	by	a	mentally	
ill	person	is	about	the	same	as	the	risk	of	being	struck	by	lightning.	People	with	mental	illness	are	far	
more	likely	to	hurt	themselves	than	someone	else.
Of	the	55	people	killed	in	a	year	by	people	who	were	mentally	ill	only	5	are	likely	to	be	strangers.	The	
victims	are	usually	people	known	to	the	person.	
You	are	9	times	more	likely	to	be	killed	by	someone	under	the	influence	of	drugs	or	drink	-	You	are	at	
far	greater	risk	from	heavy	drinkers	than	they	are	from	the	mentally	ill.		Yet	our	fear	of	violence	from
the	mentally	ill	is	disproportionate	to	the	actual	risk.	
Why?	The	media	have	in	the	past	been	intent	on	stressing	the	dangers	posed	by	the	mentally	ill	with	
sensationalist	headlines	like	‘mad	axe	man’	etc.	And	this	creates	a	vicious	circle	–	as	people	become	
more	fearful	so	those	with	mental	illness	experience	more	stigma	and	discrimination	adding	to	the	
burden	they	already	experience	through	their	mental	health	condition.	
What	can	we	do?	Education	-	Get	the	facts	about	mental	health	issues	and	treat	those	experiencing	
difficulties	with	compassion,	respect	and	support	not	hostility	and	fear.	

NEWQ
Question	6	-	$64,000
It	is	estimated	that	since	1985	suicide	attempts	by	young	men	have…
A: Fallen	by	17%
B: Stayed	the	same
C: Risen	by	70%
D: Risen	by	170%
ANS
Answer:	D	-	risen	by	170%
ANS
Suicide	is	the	second	most	common	cause	of	death	among	people	under	35	and	accounts	for	1	in	5	of	
all	deaths	of	young	people.

NEWQ
Question	7 -	$500,000
Which	of	the	following	people	has	experienced	serious	mental	health	problems?
A: J	K	Rowling
B: Catherine	Tate
C: Robbie	Williams
D: All	of	above
ANS
Answer: D -	all	of	the	above
ANS
Many	high	profile	and	successful	figures	in	our	communities	and	in	the	news	have	mental	health	
issues.	Others	include	Ruby	Wax,	Steven	Fry,	Winston	Churchill	

NEWQ
Question 8 -	$1,000,000
Which	of	the	following	are	considered	to	be	real	medical	conditions?
A: Diabetes
B: Anxiety	disorders
C: High	blood	pressure
D: All	of	above
ANS
Answer:	D -	all	of	the	above
ANS
Mental	health	issues	and	illnesses	are	just	as	real	as	physical	illnesses.	When	they	are	mild	you	will	
often	get	better	on	your	own	the	way	you	might	from	a	cold	but	if	you	feel	low	for	more	than	2	or	3	
weeks	and	the	way	you	feel	starts	affecting	the	rest	of	your	life	you	may	need	help.	And	with	the	right	
help	you	can	make	a	full	recovery.